{% include "../math.md" %}

# Principles of force control

Consider a 1-DOF, linear, position-controlled robot as in Fig. 1. One
would like to control the contact force $$f$$ between the robot
end-effector and the wall as $$f_\mathrm{ref}$$, where
$$f_\mathrm{ref}$$ is, for example, a constant positive value.

![Contact interaction between a one-dof robot and a
 wall.](../assets/control/one_dof.png)

For that, one can use a Proportional-Derivative (PD) control law as in
Fig. 2. Note that the command sent to the robot is $$x_\mathrm{com}$$
is a desired position.

![Block diagram of a force controller to control the contact force
between the robot end-effector and the environment. The Laplace
variable s stands for differentiation with respect to time
(d/dt).](../assets/control/controller.png)


The Force/Torque (F/T) sensor measures the contact force between the
end-effector and the wall. When there is no contact (Fig. 1, top
sketch), the contact force is zero, thus $$f_\mathrm{sensed}=0$$,
yielding $$f_\mathrm{err}>0$$. Assuming stationary initial conditions,
one has next $$x_\mathrm{err}>0$$, which implies that
$$x_\mathrm{com}>x_\mathrm{cur}$$, which in turn makes the robot move
to the right, towards the wall.

Upon contact between the robot end-effector and the wall (Fig. 1,
bottom sketch), the contact force sensed by the F/T sensor
$$f_\mathrm{sensed}$$ becomes positive, but initially smaller than
$$f_\mathrm{ref}$$ â€“ assuming "soft" collision. Therefore, initially,
one still has $$x_\mathrm{com}>x_\mathrm{cur}=x_\mathrm{wall}$$,
meaning that the robot is commanded to penetrate the wall.

Finally, interactions between the PD controller and the stiffness of
the end-effector, of the wall, and of the robot's internal position
controller (characterized in part by its own PID gains), will
eventually lead to a stationary state where $$f_\mathrm{err}=0$$ and
$$x_\mathrm{com}>x_\mathrm{wall}$$ (so as to ensure a positive contact
force).
